Concept: variables (#700)
exercism/bash: concepts/variables/introduction.md

# Introduction

## Variables

Variables are a place to hold data.
Bash has two kinds of data: strings and arrays.
We'll talk about arrays later.

> You assign a variable like this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You assign a variable (often shortened to var) like this:
```

Author: Is it often shortened to var? That's news to me.

Reviewer: Yes. I mean, your next line is `varname` and not `variablename` ;) Or you can avoid shortening it in the example.

Author: resolved this by using `name="value"` for the example.

Reviewer 2: For teaching material, regardless, I do prefer using full names, even if it is often shortened in practice.  Those that are not "acronyms and abbreviations as a first language" can then easily look up those words in an English dictionary, making interpretation and deciphering easier (especially on top of mult-language audience/readers being highly likely on this platform).

```bash
varname="the value"
```

~~~~exercism/note
**Important** -- there must be _no spaces_ around the equal sign!

When there are spaces, like in this example,

```bash
x = 10
```

bash is going to call the **command** `x` with the **two arguments** `=` and `10`!
~~~~

## Parameters

> Variables can also be called "parameters".
> The difference is that a variable is assigned by you, the programmer.
> A parameter can be a read-only variable that is set by the shell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many variables are assigned by you, the programmer.
Some variables are set automatically by the shell.
These are called parameters.
```

As far as I know, bash doesn't many any of those read only.

Author: How about just this?
```
Variables can also be called "parameters".
The two terms will be used interchangably in this document.
```

Some important parameters used by or set by bash include:

* `PATH` -- a colon-separated list of directories used to find external commands.

> * `IFS` -- the "internal field separator". We'll see how it's used below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `IFS` -- the "internal field separator". 
   We'll see how it's used below.
```

> * `PWD` -- your current working directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `PWD` -- your current (or present) working directory.
```

* `RANDOM` -- a pseudo-random integer between 0 and 32767.
* `BASH_VERSION` -- the version string of the running instance of bash.

## Parameter Names

A variable name consists of uppercase letters, lowercase letters, numbers and underscore.
It cannot start with a number.

~~~~exercism/caution
It is best practice to **avoid using ALLCAPS variable names**.

> The shell uses this convention for its parameters, and you don't want to accidentally override shell parameters that have special meaning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The shell uses this convention for its parameters, and you don't want to accidentally overwrite shell parameters that have special meaning.
```

For example: [1][1], [2][2], [3][3]

[1]: https://stackoverflow.com/q/27555060/7552
[2]: https://stackoverflow.com/q/28310594/7552
[3]: https://unix.stackexchange.com/q/114596/4667
~~~~

## Parameter Expansion

> You get the value of a parameter with the `$varname` syntax.

Reviewer: Did you just define "parameters" are variables set by the shell? That would imply PE only applies to shell vars.

```bash
x=10
echo "The value of x is $x"
```

To prevent the variable name from being confused with surrounding text, you can enclose the variable name in braces.
For example to print the string `10x10`

```bash
echo "${x}x$x"
# or
echo "${x}x${x}"
```

> Some [style guides][google-style-guide] recommend using braces in most cases for readability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some [style guides][google-style-guide] recommend using braces in most cases for readability and/or consistency.
```

## Positional Parameters

As we discussed in the [Commands and Arguments][cmds-args] lesson, commands can take arguments.
Bash scripts are no exception.

> The arguments to the current instance of bash are called "positional parameters".

Reviewer: If you're inside a function, the positional params change and are not the args to the current shell instance. I don't know if it's worth making that distinction or not here.

They can be retrieved with these special parameters:

* `$1` -- the first positional parameter
* `$2` ... `$9` -- subsequent parameters
* `${10}` ... -- double digits require braces.
* `$0` -- the name of the current script.

### Special Positional Parameters

There are some "special" parameters that help you work with the positional parameters.

* `$#` expands to the _number_ of positional parameters.
* `"$@"` expands to the list of all of the positional parameters, each as a separate word.

> * `"$*"` expands to a single string of all the positional parameters joined together by a character.

Reviewer: Should `$*` have a caveat that it is usually not the right one to use?

  * The join character is _the first character_ of the `$IFS` variable, which is a space by default.

The `"$@"` is the safest way to pass positional parameters to another command while keeping them safely quoted.

> It is also what you will use to loop over them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also what you will use to loop over the positional parameters.
```

```bash
for arg in "$@"; do
    do_something_with "$arg"
done
```

## Command Substitution

> A very frequent operation you will do in bash scripts is to capture the output of a command and store it in a variable.

Reviewer: This doc mentions "you" a whole lot and things "you will do". I think the prior doc was a little bit less ...directed?

Author: Well, the first doc was not written by me. Maybe we can "put a pin in it" and revisit it after a few docs are written.

Reviewer: I could modify the factoid messages and/or Wooledge wiki, if that helps :D

Author: Upon reflection, I'll circle back to the first concept to give it a rewrite in my voice.

> To do this, you will use the command substitution syntax, like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, you will use _command substitution_.
```

```bash
var=$(command)
```

For example, to upper-case a string, you can do this:

```bash
text="Hello world!"
uppercase=$(echo "$text" | tr '[:lower:]' '[:upper:]')
echo "$uppercase"
# => HELLO WORLD!
```

## More on Parameter Expansion

Bash has many builtin facilities to manipulate variables and strings so that you don't need to call out to external commands.

> * Uppercasing text: in the previous section I showed how to use `tr` to upper case some text. To do it in bash:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Uppercasing text. The previous section showed how to use `tr` to upper case some text. Bash allows you to do that without using `tr`.
```

  ```bash
  echo "${text^^}"
  ```

* Provide a default value if the variable is empty.

  ```bash
  default="nothing here"
  result=""
  echo "${result:-$default}"
  # => nothing here
  ```

* Search and replace.

  ```bash
  text="Hello world!"
  echo "${text//[aeiou]/X}"
  # => HXllX wXrld!"
  ```

> There are many other interesting parameter expansions. 

Reviewer: I wonder if it's worth at least mentioning a bunch of the others.
